Understanding and Prioritizing Data Privacy
https://www.linkedin.com/learning/understanding-and-prioritizing-data-privacy

what do I decide to share? with whom? and when?
all decisions are based on data stories

data is a version of IP = intellectual property

data privacy + protection = authorized processing of PII data according to fair principles
PII = info that can describe a discrete individual

secrecy != privacy
confidentiality != privacy

privacy = authorized processing of PII
ex: violating privacy = sharing credit card info to make a payment, and data is used elsewhere which was not authorized

well governed data system
1. is the processing moral? 
ex: chip prisoners + collect permentant record of their activity = HUGE moral issue 
2. is the processing ethical? treats people in a consistent way that you know is "right"
ex: would you brand be hurt if they found out how they are treating your data?
3. is the processing legal? what are the rules + regulations that apply to that data?
ex: protect EU citizens whereever they go
4. is the processing fair? have a lot in common in ethics
FIPPs = fair info protection principles - prevade how we look at privacy 
how much data is collected? how much does it describe the data subject? how is the data flowing from ingest to expiration?

data is a mirror of humanity
data describes stories about individual lives

organizations care about data because it brings value to the organization
many orgs think they don't care about data privacy
many think collecting more is better
however data needs to be considered as assets and liabilities 

privacy is contextual
ex: the info you share with your dr is different than the data you share with your coworkers

orgs can build trust by governing and architecting systems with users' best interest in mind
have individual's that are accountable for info throughout itself lifecycle
audit systems = make sure systems are processing systems in a fair, moral, ethical, and legal manner at all times 
trust is built over time with their employees + their consumers

trust is created when we know
- what the data is
- what it is supposed to be doing when 
- how are we supporting the context with people process + tech

data trust cliff
as you are starting to build trust and individual gives you more and more more and more and then...
share info to third parties that person didn't know about
data security breach
user finds out more data is collected than necessary

talk to consumers as open + honest as possible
have an avenue where consumers can provide feedback
give the user the right to correct their data

vulnerability in sharing info is always present
when an individual + org come together in data exchange, there is vulnerability
build trust over time

data is not well designed or curated = vulnerability

what do you do in terms of breach?
prepare for all sorts of scenarios before they happen by making a plan
1.  who needs to be informed?
2. how should they be notified?
3. what info is critical to recovery?

2 sorts of companies - those who have breached, or don't realize they haven't been breached 

when preparing ask yourself
is the incident over? have I stopped the bleeding?
who else is vulnerable?
who does this impact?

prevention + good governance helps mitigate the inevitable pain when a breach occurs by knowing what exactly was captured + how to stop the bleeding

there is a ton of risk + a ton of value in data
think of data as a currency - what can I get with this one dollar? what can I get with this piece of data?

